[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
Our very special guest,
Richard Estep is with us.
Now Richard is
paranormal author who
has written more than a dozen
books detailing its most
harrowing investigations.
Richard has also co-founded
the Boulder County Paranormal
Research Group with his wife,
Laura, and that was in 1999.
And he has also appeared on
a number of television shows,
"Haunted Hospitals" and
"Paranormal 911" on the Travel
Channel.
Richard, welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
>>RICHARD ESTEP: Thank
you for having me, George.
>>NOORY: How did you get
involved in all of this?
>>ESTEP: Well, as a young kid,
I grew up in a haunted house
that my grandparents owned.
>>NOORY: Ooh.
>>ESTEP: And that
fascinated me, you know?
There were no TV shows
back in those days.
There were no "Ghost
Hunters," "Ghost Adventures"
kind of shows.
And you had to go to books.
You had to haunt your library,
if you'll pardon the pun,
in order to get your ghost fix.
And I was that kid.
>>NOORY: And it stuck with
you forever, didn't it?
>>ESTEP: Forever.
And came with me when I moved
from the US-- excuse me,
the UK to the US in 1999.
>>NOORY: What caused
that move for you?
>>ESTEP: I worked for a
local company here, IBM,
in Boulder, Colorado.
>>NOORY: Just a
small, little company.
>>ESTEP: Yeah, a
>>NOORY: And you never forgot
the paranormal, did you?
>>ESTEP: You know, it got into
my blood at a very young age.
And all kids love ghost stories,
but I never outgrew that love.
And I spent years in the UK
investigating and learning
the technique for researching
claims of the paranormal.
And there were so
many great places here
in the United States
to bring that to.
>>NOORY: What is it that
makes a house haunted?
>>ESTEP: Oh, that's a
great question, isn't it?
Generally speaking, in
my experience, George,
there are three
types of haunting.
You've got haunted
places, haunted objects,
and haunted people.
So it might be somebody
that lives in the house.
It might be the house itself, or
the ground that it's built on.
>>NOORY: Or the ground.
That's good.
>>ESTEP: Or an
object that has been
brought into the
house, and sometimes
a combination of all three.
>>NOORY: Would you ever want
to live atop a cemetery?
>>ESTEP: You know, isn't
America one big cemetery?
Isn't every country one
big cemetery, essentially?
Having come from the
London area in the past,
London is built upon
generations of Londoners.
You know, it's built on
plague pits dating back
to the Black Death.
So in a kind of
real sense, we all
do live on top of a cemetery.
That's what society is.
>>NOORY: Would you like to
live in a haunted house,
knowing somebody died there?
>>ESTEP: I mean, I have.
I've spent time living in
several haunted locations,
and one of them at least
belonged to a serial killer.
The murders took
place in the house.
Yeah.
That was Fox Hollow
Farm in Indiana.
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>ESTEP: And it's not always
the most pleasant of things,
but yeah, I'm OK with
that kind of background.
>>NOORY: I don't think I'd want
to live in a house like that.
Too much energy.
Negative energy there.
>>ESTEP: But you
know, there are people
that bring positive energies
to places like that.
And I like the idea.
Energy, after all, is
what this is all about.
I like the idea that you
can convert a negative
into a positive.
>>NOORY: When you go to
these haunted locations,
are people calling you, saying,
hey, this house may be haunted,
come investigate it?
Or do you already know about it?
>>ESTEP: Well, much like
yourself, George, I'm a writer,
and I'm always
interested in a story.
A human story.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ESTEP: And so I
generally will be
interested in the
lives of those that
have lived at the location and
the strange things that occur
while people are living there.
So that's what I always look at.
What's the story
to be told here,
and how can I add a
chapter of my own?
>>NOORY: It's amazing
work that you do.
You like it.
>>ESTEP: I love it.
It's my passion.
Most people go on vacation
and they'll take a cruise
or go sit on the
beach, you know?
I'm fortunate I have an
understanding wife that
lets me go live in
an old abandoned
hospital for a week or a jail.
I go to jail--
I've done a lot of jail time
as a paranormal investigator.
>>NOORY: Are jails haunted too?
>>ESTEP: Enormously.
When you think
about it, the amount
of negative energy
you get in a jail--
>>NOORY: Oh, it's huge.
>>ESTEP: --the amount of
despair, the amount of anger,
the amount of hatred.
It would amaze me if
some kind of psychic scar
wasn't left over from that.
>>NOORY: What drives you, Rich?
What pushes you into this area?
>>ESTEP: I think
like everybody else,
I've always had this
fascination of what
happens to us after we die.
I mean, we all want to know,
and we'll all find out one day.
>>NOORY: Or we won't.
>>ESTEP: Or we won't.
[LAUGHS] Yeah, absolutely.
Good point.
But to that, I want to--
I've always wanted to have
a look behind the veil
to see what's in the next room.
It's that curiosity
that drives me.
>>NOORY: We've got an
investigator, Jeff Belanger,
a great guy who's talked
about traveling to a haunted
location.
>>ESTEP: And a master
storyteller too, is Jeff.
>>NOORY: Let's look
at one of his stories.
>>JEFF BELANGER:
If you want to say
there's no such thing
as ghosts, that's fine.
I don't personally believe that.
But at the same time,
the stories are real.
The history's real.
And in a lot of
respects, George,
ghosts are history
demanding to be remembered.
To talk about ghosts,
to talk about hauntings
is to talk about our past,
to connect with our past,
with our ancestors,
with our history.
All of that stuff goes into
making us who we are today.
And what better
way to explore it
than with these great stories?
>>NOORY: You have a
passion for this stuff.
>>BELANGER: I love this stuff.
It's so much fun.
You know, when I travel, I
want to see haunted places.
I want to become part
of those stories.
You know, you hear these things,
you see them on television,
you hear them on
"Coast to Coast,"
and you want to see them for
yourselves, because maybe,
just maybe you're going
to have that experience,
that once-in-a-lifetime event
that makes you say, whoa.
There's more to this
than meets the eye.
>>NOORY: Why are these
places, Jeff, haunted?
I mean, what is creating
this kind of energy
where these spirits,
entities, whatever they may be
hang around?
>>BELANGER: That's the
million dollar question.
[LAUGHS] If I knew
for sure, I think
there's as many reasons for
ghosts as there are ghosts.
In some respects, there's
a tragedy that took place.
And people talk
about that tragedy.
We relive it.
We give energy to it the
more we say, oh, this
is where there was a
murder or a suicide
or an unfortunate death.
And so that's often the
backstory of a haunting.
But not always.
Sometimes it's just
like a movie that
replays over and over again.
It's just the past
that just almost
gets imprinted on a location.
We might call it the
stone tape theory.
But there's so many different
theories to what's the reasons.
To me, it's simply a place
is haunted when people
have experiences, when
they talk about it,
and it gets a reputation.
Now, if things happen often,
it's an active haunting.
If it's years in
between, not so much.
>>NOORY: He's like you.
He's excited about what he does.
>>ESTEP: And Jeff makes some
very salient points there,
and he talked about some of the
things like murder and suicide.
But I would also add that
positive hauntings occur
very commonly too, when somebody
loves a place a great deal,
you know?
Perhaps the old
lady and gentleman
that bought their dream home and
they lived there for 50 years
and were blissfully happy there,
raised a family, they pass on.
Either they leave something
of themselves behind
or they come back and
visit, or so it seems.
Now the truth is, unfortunately,
those kind of stories
aren't great for headlines
and they're not popular.
Scary sells.
But they're every bit as
common, if not more so,
than some of the darker stuff,
and that's a wonderful thing.
>>NOORY: I've got a house that
was built in 1926 in St. Louis,
and for a couple of years my
granddaughter lived there.
And I go back and forth between
St. Louis and Los Angeles.
And she would always say, Papa,
I see a little old man in here
sometimes at night.
And I thought, oh, come on, Ari.
What is this?
I haven't seen a
little old man there,
and I've been there
for 12, 13 years.
And then my daughter spent
the night there one night.
And she said, Dad,
did anybody ever
tell you about some kind of
little old man in this house?
And she had not talked to
my granddaughter about that.
It was her aunt.
And I said, uh, yeah.
And she described the same
kind of entity or being.
Something's here,
obviously, right?
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
And perhaps a former resident
of the home, you know?
Someone that was
happy there, someone
that went through the same
routine over and over again.
As Jeff said, sometimes you get
these less active hauntings,
and it's almost as if it's an
after echo of the person that
lived there, you know?
We get this glimpse
into the past.
Doesn't mean it's intelligent.
Doesn't mean there
is literally somebody
there that she could
communicate with any more
than you could communicate
with a picture on your TV set.
Sometimes it's just replaying
itself over and over
until that energy finally
Peters out and goes away.
>>NOORY: Why do
they wander around?
Why do they stay in the house?
Is it because they like
the place and they need it?
Don't they know they're dead?
>>ESTEP: In the case of
an intelligent haunting,
I think that they're drawn
there or they stay there
for some kind of purpose.
The earliest haunting that
I'm aware of on record
takes us back to
ancient Rome, and it
was a house that was haunted
by the classic clanking chains
kind of ghost that
was trying to--
>>NOORY: Scrooge.
Scrooge.
>>ESTEP: Very, very
similar to that, yeah.
But was trying to
indicate that its body had
been buried in the yard.
And once the body
was uncovered--
the ghost would walk
out into the yard
and residents of the
home were terrified.
They would never
follow this apparition.
Indicated that if they
dug in a certain spot,
they would find the body
of the murdered man.
And so the purpose in that
case was some kind of closure.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>ESTEP: And we
often see that there
is that kind of aha
moment in some hauntings.
Many seem to just want
acknowledgment, George.
But others are no more
aware of us than--
I should say, they can't
interact with us, you know?
I flip on my TV, I
see you on my screen,
you're not actually
in my living room.
It's an image of you.
And I think many
ghosts are that way.
They're a natural phenomenon.
>>NOORY: If someone
believes they're
living in a haunted
house and they need
some help, what do they do?
>>ESTEP: Well, the first thing
I really like to tell people is,
don't be afraid.
Do not live in fear, OK?
Because we are afraid
of the unknown.
But what I recommend
that you do is start
to keep a log of what strange
things happen at what times
of the day, because a reputable
paranormal investigator will
come in and will
look for patterns.
Do things always occur at
a certain time of the day
or at night?
I investigated one
case, for example,
where we found that the
reason the house was starting
to act strangely was that
they were on the main flight
path to Denver
International Airport.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>ESTEP: And we were able to
correlate these strange sounds
inside the house
with flight patterns
overhead, heavy aircraft
coming in to land.
So you know, I
recommend contacting
a reputable investigator,
but giving them
some data to work with.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
And strange, too, isn't it?
>>ESTEP: I think the
world works in very, very
many strange ways.
But I also think part
of the challenge,
part of the allure for
people that do what I do
is we like to try and
find those patterns,
and we like to solve
those mysteries.
>>NOORY: One of your shows
on the Travel Channel
is called "Haunted Hospitals."
Let's talk about
these hospitals.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SIRENS]
[BEEPING]
>> What I loved most about
my job was helping people.
I wanted to be someone
who made a difference.
>> My goal of working at the
hospital was to stay there
and work there for a long time.
It did not work out that way.
[STATIC]
[MUTTERING]
[ANGRY WHISPERING]
>> I would feel this presence,
a sense of heaviness.
I felt an energy around me.
[GASP]
>> A hospital is one very
concentrated building.
People are dying and passing
from this life into the next.
>> Somebody's watching me.
>> Can you hear that?
>> And that leaves
behind a residue.
[BEEPING]
>> I'm one of the nurses here.
[WHOOSH]
(ANGRILY) I'll kill you.
[ROARING]
>> I did think to myself
that this woman is possessed.
>> That's when the cart
goes flying across the room.
[SCREAM]
>> The voice I heard
was not of the living.
[SCREAMING]
>> I have never seen anything
so foreboding in all of my life.
[CRASHING]
[ROAR]
[SCREAMING]
>> I understand why
people wouldn't believe,
and that's how I felt too, till
it actually happened to me.
And now nothing
will change my mind.
It's definitely real.
>>NOORY: Richard,
what a creepy place.
>>ESTEP: And the truth is that
"Haunted Hospital" showcases
some of the more
frightening stories
that providers have that had
an emotional impact on them.
>>NOORY: Is that an ongoing
hospital, still open?
>>ESTEP: Actually,
there are-- we cover
39 different cases each season.
>>NOORY: That's a lot.
>>ESTEP: And some of them are
old and they're now-- yeah,
it is.
Yeah.
Some of them are old
and now shut down.
Others, though, are
working, everyday hospitals.
>>NOORY: I would hate
to be in that hospital.
>>ESTEP: You know, again,
it comes back to the whole,
is it the hospital?
Is it the people involved?
When I became an EMT in 2002--
right after 9/11, I joined the
fire service and became an EMT.
>>NOORY: You did.
Thank you for that.
>>ESTEP: I appreciate it.
Thank you.
And it wasn't long before
I became that ghost guy
that I would have other EMTs
and paramedics and then nurses
and doctors, you know, oh,
you've got a ghost story.
Tell that ghost guy when
he brings a patient in.
And I realized that I was
hearing these stories from so
many medical professionals.
And I'm sure over the
course of your career,
you've met many people
in the medical field.
And we're very close
to death, and we're
very close to those
extremes of emotion.
And I realized, this
is a huge phenomenon
within the medical community.
And many of them did not
want to be identified
when they shared their stories,
which makes me more impressed.
These weren't people that
were seeking to become famous.
They just wanted to say, this
strange thing happened to me.
I'll tell you, but
then I don't want
to be associated
with this publicly.
>>NOORY: I had a call
from a police officer
on the radio show one day, and
they were the first responders.
They got there before
even the EMTs got there.
And the call was that somebody
was dying of a heart attack.
Get to this house.
So they got there
before the EMTs.
They get to the door.
They knock on the door.
A little man opens the door for
them and kind of shows them in.
And immediately on the
floor on his stomach
is somebody who obviously
is in distress or dying.
They get to him.
He's dead.
They turn him over.
It's the little old man who
opened the door to let them in.
How do you explain that?
And this was a police officer
who's calling the program,
and he's dead serious.
>>ESTEP: Has nothing to
gain by making this up,
by spinning a tale.
>>NOORY: Nope.
>>ESTEP: And you know, doctors
are very rational people.
I always say that nurses are
the NCOs of the medical world.
They make hospitals
run in the same way
that sergeants
make the army run.
They'll tell you
what they think.
Doctors are a little
more circumspect,
but many doctors have
come to me over the years,
and they've said, you know, I
have a scientific background.
I don't believe in
this kind of hooey.
But this one time--
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
>>ESTEP: And they go on and
tell me this incredible--
And I would say, but how
do you explain that, doc?
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>ESTEP: And they say,
well, one of those things.
>>NOORY: And they
still don't believe.
>>ESTEP: Right.
Or they don't think about it.
They don't want to
examine this too closely,
because as you're well aware
and your viewers are well
aware, if you start looking
into phenomena like this,
you realize the world is much
broader and stranger than most
people are comfortable
with acknowledging.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
In the "Hospital" series, the
"Haunted Hospitals," what story
rings out for you that you
just will never forget?
>>ESTEP: Oh, that is
a terrific question.
It's one that my friend Kimm
Anderson brought to the show.
Kimm runs a haunted
house in Tooele, Utah.
And he does this for
the local children.
So this town has a community
of kids that really don't
have a lot of options as--
>>NOORY: So they want to go to
haunted houses for fun, right?
>>ESTEP: Well, when
I say haunted house,
I mean the kind of
Halloween attraction
where you go to scare people.
And so these kids work
in the haunted house.
And so he bought
the local hospital
when it shut down and
turned it into a haunt.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>ESTEP: And the people
that left, they just
closed the doors and left.
They left the beds, they
left the X-ray machines.
>>NOORY: They just
got out of there.
>>ESTEP: They just
literally locked the doors
and walked out because
a newer hospital
had opened in the neighborhood.
And it wasn't long before he
started running this place,
and people started
saying things like,
we loved your haunted house,
but the doctor in the emergency
department seemed really angry.
Like, really inappropriately
angry with us.
And he would have to say,
I didn't put a doctor
in the emergency department.
And then they would start
talking about a little girl who
was seen in the hallways.
And they would say,
she's a little young
to be working in a place
like this, don't you think?
And of course, this
was a little girl
that had died in the
hospital many years before.
And nine months of the
year, George, this hospital
is just shut down.
It's abandoned.
It's quiet.
Then around September,
people start coming in
for the Halloween
season, and they're all
coming in with the
intent of getting scared.
And the amount of energy
that this brings in I think
allows the spirits of
the hospital to manifest.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>ESTEP: So I always
spend Halloween week
locked in that hospital.
I'm doing the same this year.
>>NOORY: Well, you've heard
about the exorcist story,
the little boy from
Baltimore, Maryland,
that they turned into a movie.
The exorcism occurred
in St. Louis, Missouri,
at a hospital called
the Alexian Brothers
Hospital, which is no more.
But in that room where
they had the exorcism,
they decided, the hospital,
as it was closing down,
to sell off the furniture
that was in that room.
The bed, the little bureau,
and stuff like that.
So they got rid of it all.
People who bought the
furniture reported
horrible, horrible ghostly
stories attached to that.
I find that to be weird too.
>>ESTEP: And that
goes back to what
I said about haunted places,
haunted people, haunted
objects.
>>NOORY: They attach
to everything.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
And we talk about haunted
houses, but a lot of the time
it's not the house.
It's an artifact that was
brought into the house.
>>NOORY: Your other show
is called "Paranormal 911."
>> Hello, 911.
>> Can you please help me?
Someone's trying
to get in my house.
>> OK, did you see a person?
Did you see, like, a
shadow of a person?
>> I have a gun in my hand.
I'm terrified.
[SCREAMS]
[SIRENS]
>> I've always wanted to help
people and make a difference
in somebody's life.
Paramedic and a firefighter,
that was my calling.
>> So within law enforcement,
you're expected to put yourself
in harm's way.
>> You go home knowing that
you did something that really
benefited the person
and/or the family.
>> (SHOUTING) Drop the gun!
>> The shootings, the stabbings,
the vital signs absent
patients.
Every call's different.
>> Come on, man.
Put it down.
>> Shoot me.
>> 911, state your emergency.
>> Can you come really fast?
Please, please!
>> Being a police officer,
I've dealt with a lot of life
and death situations, but I
can honestly say this one call
scared the living
shit out of me.
[SCREAMS]
>> That's my son right there.
He was killed in a
motorcycle accident.
>> Just put the gun down.
[GUNSHOT]
[GASP]
>> I said, I can't go to
work and talk about this,
because if I do, they're going
to put me in a psychiatric
ward.
>> Please hurry.
Please.
>> Just breathe, OK?
I'm going to stay with you on
the phone until they get there.
>> What happened to me that
night was something I'd never
experienced before.
[WHOOSH]
>> I did realize with that
figure that it wasn't something
in this world.
[ROARING]
[SCREAM]
>> Make sure you're OK.
[GROWLING]
You see that?
>> But I'm a believer now.
[TENSE MUSIC]
>> Do you have an emergency?
[CREAKING]
>> (SHOUTING) Hello?
Dispatch!
[CRYING]
>>NOORY: Jeez.
Great show.
>>ESTEP: Thank you.
>>NOORY: It's scary
as all get out.
>>ESTEP: And you know, what
interests me about this
is that paramedics, EMTs,
police officers, firefighters,
all trained to keep
their heads in a crisis.
All trained to be calm.
When everybody else is running
away, we're running in.
So when these people tell
me their strange stories,
there's a huge stigma in the
emergency services community
of seeing ghosts, you know?
As the lady said, I can't go
to work and talk about this,
or they'd put me in
a mental institution.
>>NOORY: She's right.
>>ESTEP: She is.
And so only recently
have these people
been a little more comfortable
about coming forward
and telling their stories.
Often, they'll do it
after they retire.
>>NOORY: Tell me about
"Paranormal Nightshift."
What is that?
>>ESTEP: "Paranormal
Nightshift" is
a show from the same producers
that I'm involved with.
And really, after
"Paranormal 911,"
we realized that a lot of people
who work the graveyard shift
have their own strange stories.
When most people are in bed,
the rest of society is sleeping,
we know that the world is still
running, that there are still
those clerks, there are
those delivery people,
security guards, cleaners.
And they are experiencing
strange things,
and some of them are coming
to tell us their stories.
And that's what "Paranormal
Nightshift" is all about.
>>NOORY: That should
be another great show.
>>ESTEP: Coming later this year,
we hope to the Travel Channel.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Well, let us know what we can
do for you on the radio show
to help promote that.
>>ESTEP: Always happy to come
talk to you on the radio.
>>NOORY: What is it about
these apparitions that
are so scary to so many people?
>>ESTEP: I think that,
again, we fear the unknown.
And when it comes to
these sorts of phenomena,
you can watch as many movies
as you like, read as many books
as you like.
You never truly believe
until it happens to you.
I mean, deep down
at a visceral level,
you don't truly believe this
stuff until it happens to you.
So those that do
see apparitions,
it rocks the foundation
of their world.
It changes the way they look
at everything, fundamentally.
And for some, it's a
source of great fear.
But once that fear goes away,
many of these folks I talk to,
they'll tell me their
life is actually--
their worldview is broadened.
I don't know if that's been your
experience with the folks you--
>>NOORY: Same thing too.
But it makes you a believer.
>>ESTEP: It does.
And again, you know, you
can believe in many things,
but until there's
that visceral gut
punch of it happening to
you, you won't truly believe.
I think, anyway.
>>NOORY: You know,
poor law enforcement,
including yourself.
They're under so much
pressure with all
these other outside
situations that they
have to be confronted
by these things.
That's unbelievable.
>>ESTEP: And I'm
always willing to talk
to anybody that wears a badge.
Or not, but still.
They can call me or contact me
or email me with their stories
at any time.
And one of the most
important things you can do
is just listen and accept.
But I'm still working.
I'm still a paramedic,
here locally in fact.
And I still get stories from
officers and from EMS providers
and firefighters.
And they'll say, you know,
don't quote me on this.
I just-- I figured
you would believe me.
>>NOORY: I had an EMT
caller a couple years ago
who was driving in her car.
She wasn't on duty.
Came across an accident and
saw a body outside of the car.
And it was a single
car accident.
And she jumped out, and she's--
you know, her cell
phone's in her car.
She's looking at the body.
She sees somebody standing
on the side of the road,
screaming at him,
going, call 911, please.
Call 911.
She realized again
that was the body.
He'd already died and was
ghostly, standing on the side,
just watching.
>>ESTEP: I wrote a book
called "Haunted Healthcare"
and talked to a nurse that was
involved with a resuscitation
in which a-- it's
a very sad story--
the driver of a car had
hit a family of four and--
>>NOORY: Oh, god.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
And he had been killed.
The driver had been killed,
as had members of the family.
And as the nurses,
physicians, and technicians
in the ED, the
Emergency Department,
were resuscitating one
of the family members,
some but not all of them noticed
a gentleman standing back
against the far wall
of the emergency room.
>>NOORY: There he was.
>>ESTEP: And that's it.
So they all assumed, maybe this
is just a family member that
came in or was in the car.
We'll get to you later.
We're working here.
And it was only
later they realized
it was the driver of the car
that hit the family whose
body was in the room
next door and had just
been pronounced dead.
>>NOORY: Wow.
That's just real stuff.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
And what fascinates me is,
why do only half of the people
in the room notice this
guy, and why do half not?
Because we still don't know
how people see ghosts, George.
>>NOORY: That's a good point.
>>ESTEP: I'm actually
of the opinion
that we don't see them at all.
I think we perceive them
by some other means.
>>NOORY: Some people are
more sensitive than others
and they pick up on this.
How many books do
you have out there?
>>ESTEP: It's 20-something now.
I'm embarrassed to give you--
>>NOORY: 20-some books?
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Whoa.
How are you so prolific?
>>ESTEP: I love to write.
I write every day.
I don't sleep well unless I've
written about thousand words.
But the secret is it doesn't
feel like work to me, you know?
I'm living these adventures
in haunted locations,
and then I get to come and
just recall them for people
that want to read them.
>>NOORY: Are they
all haunted-related?
>>ESTEP: Until this year, yeah.
They've all been
haunted-related.
I just finished my first
non-paranormal book,
which is a big 150,000-word
overview of some
of the world's serial killers.
And my newest
contracted project is
a history of the US military.
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
That's interesting.
>>ESTEP: No ghosts there.
Well, maybe I'll sneak one in.
>>NOORY: So the subject matter,
the hauntings that you go on
then turn into books primarily?
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
I like to move into a
haunted location if possible,
spend several days
there around the clock.
It's my belief--
and I learned this
back in fire academy
many years ago.
Firefighters will tell you,
the enemy is not the fire,
it's the building.
The building is
what'll kill you.
It's your battleground.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>ESTEP: So firefighters
study construction.
We're interested in the way
air moves through a building.
We're interested in
how buildings behave.
>>NOORY: What the floor's like.
>>ESTEP: Exactly, yeah.
The camber of the floor,
the way things are laid out.
And it takes a good
24 hours in a place
to understand a
structure, you know?
We've got some hot
days right now.
It's June.
So buildings like this will heat
up today, and then tonight when
it cools, they'll contract.
They'll creak.
Phantom footsteps on
the floor above you,
except it's just the
house contracting.
So I like to do that
for my first 24 hours,
just get to know the building.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>ESTEP: Then we have a
baseline to start testing
some of these anomalous claims.
>>NOORY: What if it's not the
house contracting, but actually
footsteps?
>>ESTEP: That's why
we're really there.
I would tell you
frankly that 90%
of my time as a paranormal
investigator is wasted.
I spend 90% of my time
waiting for 10% to happen.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>ESTEP: You know?
>>NOORY: But that 10%
makes it worth waiting for.
>>ESTEP: And that
honestly parallels my time
in the fire service and
in emergency medicine.
90% of what we do is
not a true emergency.
But the 10% that is
makes it rewarding work,
more rewarding work.
>>NOORY: Do you get a call
sometimes and you just
get there and go,
why did they call us?
>>ESTEP: You know,
I'll tell you.
Most paramedics do.
But the way to look at
this, and the reason
that I've done this
for 17 years now
and will hopefully go
on to do it much longer
is that there is no such
thing as an unimportant call.
It might not be an
emergency to me--
>>NOORY: Right.
But it may not be
important to you.
>>ESTEP: But it
may-- yeah, exactly.
But it becomes
important, because I
would say the most important
thing I ever do in medicine
is hold a lonely person's hand.
They call us because
it's the worst
day they're ever going to have.
And we have the
privilege of trying
to make that better, or at
least suck a little bit less.
>>NOORY: Do they ever follow
up and thank you and find you?
>>ESTEP: I'll be
shopping in the store
and someone will come
up to me and say hello.
And it will take me
a moment to realize,
the last time I saw them they
were significantly unwell.
[LAUGHS]
It does happen.
Medicine is a rewarding job.
It really is.
>>NOORY: What do you
think of serial killers?
>>ESTEP: I think they're are
a lot more prevalent than we
give credit for.
>>NOORY: The FBI says
there are many wandering
this planet right now.
>>ESTEP: Yeah, and the
smart ones, of course,
don't get caught.
So it's the ones
that get away with it
that are perhaps the most
interesting and alarming.
>>NOORY: Recently,
I had a chance
to interview a
conspiracy researcher,
Olav Phillips, about
the Zodiac killer.
And he had some astounding
things to tell us.
What other strange occurrences
when you were investigating?
>>OLAV PHILLIPS:
We had flashlights
that would turn on and off.
We actually got to a
point where we had set up
a series of flashlights, and
we could ask him questions
and get him to turn the
flashlights on and off.
>>NOORY: And you
felt his presence?
>> PHILLIPS: The temperature--
once he became active,
the temperature in the place
dropped by at least 15 degrees.
>>NOORY: Of all the suspects
that are out there--
and like I said, there's
a handful of them--
would you say that he might
have been the biggest suspect?
>> PHILLIPS: Listening to
him talk on the SB7, I mean,
it's very pointed.
He says, I am the Zodiac.
He was very clear.
And all the communications
that we had through the SB7
were in other ways
that were very clear.
His intent was very clear.
When I was in that building--
and it's not a big building.
But when I was in
that building--
>>NOORY: And that
building's still there?
>> PHILLIPS: The
building's still there.
Yep.
And the newspaper's
still in the building.
>>NOORY: Did it scare
you when you were there?
>> PHILLIPS: Yes.
>>NOORY: And you
don't get scared.
>> PHILLIPS: No.
More than any haunted
location I've ever been to,
you could just feel it.
>>NOORY: Evil.
>> PHILLIPS: You could
feel the malevolence.
>>NOORY: Pure evil.
>> PHILLIPS: And when
he was doing things,
he was messing with you.
And you knew that he
was messing with you.
You knew that he was
there and he wanted--
he was after you.
>>NOORY: Do you feel pure evil,
Richard, sometimes when you're
in these situations?
>>ESTEP: You know, I didn't
used to see it that way, George.
But I've worked a number
of cases in which I
start to question that.
Perhaps the most recent one--
and I can kind of report a
similar experience to Olav--
was in the Villisca Ax
Murder House in Iowa,
which is one of the books
I'm finishing this year.
And if you're not familiar
with those murders,
this is the story that
actually knocked the Titanic
off the front pages
of US newspapers.
>>NOORY: Oh, really?
>>ESTEP: Somebody--
>>NOORY: That's a huge story.
>>ESTEP: It was massive.
Person or persons--
there is a debate--
unknown walked into a house in
this tiny town, Villisca, Iowa,
and took the family's
own ax from the woodpile.
It's believed the killer
was hiding in the barn.
Broke in after the
family had gone to bed,
murdered the parents in their
bed, and then six children
also, all with this ax.
The Villisca Ax Murder
House is kind of
unique in that most
scenes of murders
like that are demolished.
They're pulled down.
But that house stands pretty
much today as it was then.
>>NOORY: What a horrible story.
>>ESTEP: It is a
horrible story, and there
is a theory that's
quite well regarded,
the man from the
train theory, which
posits that this was a hobo
riding the rails across the US.
And in those days, police
departments and jurisdictions
didn't talk to one another.
>>NOORY: Right.
And they didn't have computers.
>>ESTEP: Right.
So the concept of
a serial killer
really wasn't well known then.
But there were a series of very
similar murders, all of them
very close to railroad
tracks, heading
across the US, and one of
them kind of local to us
here in Colorado Springs.
Always the family killed
with their own hatchet.
Always every reflective
surface-- windows,
mirrors inside the
house-- covered up.
Always an assault upon the
most attractive female member
of the house.
The parallels are
very well regarded.
But most of those
properties are gone.
Villisca, you can
still visit today,
and I spent several days
and nights researching that.
And there is something
about that house
that is not quite right.
>>NOORY: Are you the
modern day Truman Capote?
[LAUGHS]
This sounds like
"In Cold Blood."
>>ESTEP: I would
not be so arrogant
as to presume to be at
his standard of writing.
But I find that the story
of Villisca fascinates me.
You go to the cemetery
in town, and all eight
of those poor victims are--
their graves are in one
long, continuous plot.
>>NOORY: That's
a horrible story.
>>ESTEP: Yeah, and nobody has
ever answered for that crime.
They did not catch
any perpetrator.
>>NOORY: Would that
person still be alive
or they'd be dead by now?
>>ESTEP: Not right-- no.
No, they would not
be alive any longer.
This was back in
the early 1900s,
so they got away with it.
And there are many
theories about-- just as
with the Zodiac killings.
Zodiac could, I guess, be
in a nursing home right now.
>>NOORY: He could be.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
The Villisca murderer
is long dead and gone.
Or murderers.
>>NOORY: Were there other
cases similar to that
that you might have been able to
tie together with that murder?
>>ESTEP: With the
Villisca murders?
Absolutely, there were several.
And again, if you
plot them out--
there is a great
book I recommend
called "The Man From
the Train," which
lays all of this stuff out.
It was written by a
baseball statistician
of all things whose hobby
was looking at stats
and then realized, there's
a pattern here emerging.
>>NOORY: There's something here.
>>ESTEP: These ax murders
spread across the US,
tracking railroad.
>>NOORY: Oh.
So this hobo, as they would
call them, jumped on the train,
went to a city, did his heinous
deeds, jumped on a train
again, went to another city
and did it all over again.
And they never caught him.
>>ESTEP: Right.
And it scarred the
town of Villisca.
I mean, for the longest time,
people believed it was a local.
And so there were stories
of whole families--
so you would get together
with your neighbors,
because they feared
this would happen again.
>>NOORY: I bet they
were petrified.
>>ESTEP: Right.
And so the fathers
would take it in turns
to sit up at night
with a shotgun.
You would have two
families in a house.
They would sleep in shifts,
two hours on, two hours off.
Dad would sit up with a
shotgun, waiting for somebody
to break in.
They never understood
that this was
a stranger that came in, struck
one night, and then moved on.
>>NOORY: What's the
target date for this book?
>>ESTEP: This book will be
out in November of this year.
I have one more visit to
pay to Villisca, which I'll
be doing at the end of July.
>>NOORY: Does it feel
creepy when you're there?
>>ESTEP: It absolutely does.
And I recorded the
last time I was there.
I was with two other
grown men in the house,
and we recorded the sound
of children laughing.
>>NOORY: Laughing.
>>ESTEP: Laughing.
>>NOORY: Not crying.
>>ESTEP: No.
Giggling, laughing children.
>>NOORY: That freaks me out.
>>ESTEP: Freaked me out.
>>NOORY: Children sounds
of ghosts freak me out.
I don't know why.
They're kids.
But they just sound eerie.
>>ESTEP: Definitely, I
would agree with you.
And we had similar unusual
phenomena with flashlights.
Now, there is an old
technique with Maglites,
those magnetic flashlights
where you unscrew them
to a certain level.
That's been pretty
effectively debunked.
It's proven that as the current
passes through the flashlight,
it will expand and
contract, and therefore you
get that flickering.
So I don't put much
stock in Maglites,
but the electronic
LED flashlights,
which have an On/Off button,
we were getting those switching
themselves off and on in the
Villisca Ax Murder House,
and that's a whole different
level of phenomenon
that you can't explain.
>>NOORY: What entity might
have been doing that?
>>ESTEP: Well, here's the thing.
The killer didn't
die in the house.
The only people that
died in the house--
>>NOORY: That's a good point--
>>ESTEP: Were the
innocents that lived there.
So a theory that I have,
one that we don't really
give too much thought to,
is paranormal enthusiasts
such as myself, people that go
to all of these locations, many
of them go to Villisca.
I think sometimes we take
along attachments with us.
I think in the same way that you
can dirt into somebody's house
if you go visit, you don't
wipe your feet properly--
>>NOORY: You bring something in.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
And I think that
much of this activity
may be unrelated to what
took place at the house.
>>NOORY: There seems to be a lot
of sadness connected to it too.
>>ESTEP: There is.
And sleeping in that house
is not a pleasant experience.
>>NOORY: You've done that?
>>ESTEP: I have.
If you go upstairs to
the master bedroom--
and it's an open plan bedroom
at the top of the stairs--
there are a series of
nicks on the ceiling.
And it takes a moment
before you realize that was
from the back swing of the ax.
>>NOORY: And they kept
these things intact?
>>ESTEP: It's in the
ceiling of the house.
So--
>>NOORY: Fix the ceiling.
>>ESTEP: But you know, then
you're changing history,
and I think there's a lot to be
said for preserving something
like this for
future generations.
>>NOORY: And that's why they
have kept it the way it is.
>>ESTEP: It's not the kind
of place you enjoy visiting,
but it has its lessons.
>>NOORY: Small house?
>>ESTEP: Very, very small house.
I usually take two or no more
than three people with me
when I investigate in Villisca.
>>NOORY: Do you think they let
him in, or did he break in?
>>ESTEP: Well, here's the thing.
One theory suggests that
he was hiding in the barn,
watching the family come
and go throughout the day.
Then they went to church.
So one theory says that he broke
in while they were at church,
waited in the attic, and then
came out when they were asleep.
Another says that he broke in
through a downstairs window,
taking their ax
from the woodpile
after they'd all gone to bed.
And a third theory says
that he had an accomplice.
But I will tell you this--
>>NOORY: Now if he
had an accomplice,
this person traveled
with him all the time.
>>ESTEP: Exactly.
But I will tell you this.
It's impossible to be
silent in that house.
Those old wooden balloon
frame buildings creak.
You cannot climb that
staircase quietly.
>>NOORY: No.
>>ESTEP: So it's a
mystery to me how
he was able to do what
he did without waking
the whole family up.
>>NOORY: And whatever he
did, he had to do fast.
The screams alone would
wake up the other ones
and they'd run out.
>>ESTEP: And then spent the
whole night in the house
afterwards.
So the best guess is the
killings occurred sometime
after midnight, and that he
left sometime before dawn.
So he was in the house
for several hours--
>>NOORY: With all
the dead bodies.
>>ESTEP: --with all
of the dead bodies.
And even cooked himself food.
>>NOORY: No.
>>ESTEP: Mm-hmm.
>>NOORY: Truly a sick person.
>>ESTEP: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: What creates
someone like that?
>>ESTEP: Well, this is the
great debate, isn't it?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>ESTEP: It's the whole
nature versus nurture.
Are some people
just wired wrong?
Are some people just born evil?
Or is it a--
>>NOORY: Something
happened to him.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
Or is there an event
that happens which twists
somebody, that corrupts them?
>>NOORY: Abused as a child
or something horrible.
>>ESTEP: And I researched
so many serial killers
for this book.
There are many defining
characteristics in childhood
that they have in common.
A lot of them-- the male serial
killers-- because they're
predominantly male.
There are few--
>>NOORY: Most are.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
There are a few, but some
female serial killers.
But many of them are
mommy's boys, you know?
They were--
>>NOORY: Like Ted Bundy.
>>ESTEP: Yeah, absolutely.
They were doted upon by their
mothers to an unusual degree.
So there is that.
Early incidences of bedwetting
that go on late into childhood
and sometimes adulthood.
But also a fundamental
lack of empathy, and I
think that's to me the
defining characteristic.
To do what they do, you cannot
regard your victim as a person.
They dehumanize people.
>>NOORY: They have to.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
>>NOORY: It's the only way
for them to do what they do.
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
The way you and I might
carve up our lunch,
they carve up people.
>>NOORY: Do they ever
have real relationships?
>>ESTEP: I think
many of them become
very good at faking
real relationships,
but you also see those
that have this dual life.
When I investigated the haunting
of Fox Hollow Farm in Indiana,
which was home of the I-70
strangler, Herb Baumeister,
he murdered up to
19 men in that house
and buried the bodies in
the woods behind the house.
He was a family man who I was
told by so many locals doted
on his kids.
And they said, he'd give
you the shirt off his back.
He was the nicest guy, you know?
He would help you with anything,
donate to charity, you name it.
>>NOORY: It's like that
BTK killer in Wichita--
was it--
>>ESTEP: Yeah.
Dennis Rader, I believe.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>ESTEP: Well known
in his church.
>>NOORY: Family would
have no idea he did this.
>>ESTEP: It's
almost as if they're
able to seal off that
aspect of their personality.
And then, of course,
you're forced
to wonder, well, which is the
real mask, and which is them?
>>NOORY: But they don't see it?
The family doesn't see anything?
>>ESTEP: Well, you know, I mean,
looking at the Fox Hollow case,
I have a lot of sympathy
for the killer's wife.
People said she must have known.
And he waited until
she would take weekends
away with the children at
the lake to do the murders.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ESTEP: Most people, if your
spouse is acting strangely,
yeah, you might have
some concerns, you know?
Maybe they're having an affair.
Maybe they have a problem, a
gambling problem or something.
>>NOORY: A job problem.
>>ESTEP: Nobody ever thinks--
>>NOORY: They're serial killers.
>>ESTEP: --they're
serial killers.
>>NOORY: No.
Nobody wants to think that.
>>ESTEP: But also,
why would you?
So you know, I have a lot of
sympathy for the families.
>>NOORY: How do people
track your work, Richard?
Where do they find you?
>>ESTEP: Well, George,
they can come see me
online at richardestep.net.
>>NOORY: E-S-T-E-P.
>>ESTEP: Yes, sir.
Or Facebook, Richard
Estep Author.
>>NOORY: Richard, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>ESTEP: It's a pleasure
and a privilege, George.
>>NOORY: Hauntings, hospitals,
houses, serial killers.
You can find it all with
Richard Estep's work.
I'm glad he's doing
it and not me.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]